Background: The rationale for fetal surveillance in monochorionic twin pregnancies is timely intervention to prevent the increased fetal/perinatal morbidity and mortality attributed to twin–twin transfusion syndrome and intrauterine growth restriction. We investigated the residual risk of fetal death after viability in otherwise uncomplicated monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies. Methods and Findings: We searched an electronic database of 480 completed monochorionic pregnancies that underwent fortnightly ultrasound surveillance in our tertiary referral fetal medicine service between 1992 and 2004. After excluding pregnancies with twin–twin transfusion syndrome, growth restriction, structural abnormalities, or twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence, and monoamniotic and high-order multiple pregnancies, we identified 151 uncomplicated monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies with normal growth, normal liquor volume, and normal Doppler studies on fortnightly ultrasound scans. Ten unexpected intrauterine deaths occurred in seven (4.6%) of 151 previously uncomplicated monochorionic diamniotic pregnancies, within 2 wk of a normal scan, at a median gestational age of 34+1 wk (weeks+days; range 28+0 to 36+3). Two of the five cases that underwent autopsy had features suggestive of acute late onset twin–twin transfusion syndrome, but no antenatal indicators of transfusional imbalance or growth restriction, either empirically or in a 1:3 gestation-matched case–control comparison. The prospective risk of unexpected antepartum stillbirth after 32 wk was 1/23 monochorionic diamniotic pregnancies (95% confidence interval 1/11 to 1/63). Conclusion: Despite intensive fetal surveillance, structurally normal monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies without TTTS or IUGR are complicated by a high rate of unexpected intrauterine death. This prospective risk of fetal death in otherwise uncomplicated monochorionic diamniotic pregnancies after 32 wk of gestation might be obviated by a policy of elective preterm delivery, which now warrants evaluation. 
        Despite intensive fetal surveillance, structurally normal monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancies were found to be complicated by a high rate of unexpected intrauterine death late in pregnancy.
      Background: As mothers wait longer to have children and more of them make use of reproductive technologies (medications that stimulate egg production and ripening, and in vitro fertilization, for example), multiple pregnancies (mostly twins and triplets) have become a lot more common. Such pregnancies carry a higher risk for mothers and fetuses, and obstetricians have developed more involved regimens of check-ups and tests to minimize those risks. Why Was This Study Done?: Guidelines for how to best manage multiple pregnancies are still under development. This study looked at how the risk of complications changed from 24 weeks of pregnancy (the earliest time point after which preterm babies can survive) on throughout the last trimester. What Did the Researchers Do?: They looked at identical (monozygotic) twins that shared a common placenta but had their own amniotic sac (the sac that holds the protective liquid called amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus inside the uterus). Twins with these characteristics make up about two-thirds of all monozygotic twins. The researchers studied the records of one United Kingdom hospital that specializes in fetal care over a 12-year period (from 1992 to 2004) and looked at the clinical details and ultrasound scan records. What Did They Find?: Of a total of 480 completed identical twin pregnancies with shared placentas, 151 were found to be uncomplicated; that is, both fetuses seemed normal and healthy on all of their regular check-up scans (done every two weeks). In seven of those 151 pregnancies, however, either one or both of the fetuses died late during pregnancy, without any prior warning signs. What Does This Mean?: Despite intensive surveillance of women during pregnancy, this particular group of pregnant women experienced a substantial rate of unexpected fetal death. The numbers in this study are small, however, and this is only one study (one needs to be careful about drawing conclusions based on one small study). In addition, the study was not designed to test a specific question but just looked at the records retrospectively. For all of these reasons, it is not clear whether these results are representative of what happens in general. What Next?: Larger studies need to test whether this risk of fetal death late in pregnancy among identical twins sharing a placenta is common. If follow-up studies confirm the preliminary results here, it might be worth delivering such twins prematurely (that is, at around 32 weeks of pregnancy), when the risks associated with premature birth are relatively small compared to the risk of losing one or both of the fetuses after that date. Additional Online Resources: Information about different types of multiple pregnancies, screening guidelines, and possible complications can be found at the following sources. 
