The study shows that half of the women had less than 80% of the recommended ANC content documented. Examining the extent of adherence to recommended practices underscores areas for improvement, notably when these practices are assessed in terms of initiation timing and frequency of interventions. Delivery of ANC should consider appropriate timing of initiation due to resource implication and maternal wellbeing. Provision of health advice which scored poorly in this study at only 35% mean score is a concern considering the importance of health education in influencing the behaviour and outcome of pregnant women. Delivery of the health topics needs to be monitored and adhered to ensure each woman has adequate coverage for essential health education. Moreover, it appeared that different health advice topics were attached with different importance by the nurses because some topics were more frequently provided to the women than others. Future studies could explore the reasons for this observation. High-risk pregnancies do require additional care and medical attention for the high-risk conditions. The high-risk women however still require basic ANC to identify or prevent other complications; delivery of ANC needs to move away from focusing on specific biological care. It is important to advocate that all pregnant women be given the complete scope of basic ANC regardless of their risk level. Our study shows that the extent of adherence to ANC content was associated with clinic-population ratio of a clinic. The staffing norm of a clinic is proportional to the planned capacity of the clinic; it is however essential to provide additional resource in highly populated areas to ensure adequate provider-user ratio.ANC content adequacy was significantly associated with preterm birth; having inadequate ANC content was associated with higher prevalence of preterm birth. This may be due to lower number of ANC visits associated with preterm births and thus lesser opportunities to receive some of the care that resulted in lower content score. However, this may also be due to lesser opportunities to receive care that may mitigate the risk of preterm birth. Having adequate level of ANC content may contribute to early detection and timely management of risk for preterm birth. In essence, the current practice of ANC and the assessment conducted by this study on ANC content provided to pregnant women were based on the current national ANC guidelines. In comparison with the recommended guidelines from other developed countries with better maternal and childbirth indicators, the local guidelines might have rooms for improvement that should be carefully examined.
