Preeclampsia (PE), a human-pregnancy-specific disease defined as the occurrence of hypertension and significant proteinuria in a previously healthy woman on or after the 20th week of gestation, occurs in about 2–8% of pregnancies [1]–[3]. Despite its prevalence and severity, the pathophysiology of PE is still not completely understood. PE is now thought to result from a combination of immunologic, inflammatory, dietary, and genetic factors that lead to the failure of normal trophoblastic invasion and remodeling of the uterine spiral arteries [4]. Therefore, the role of the imbalance between angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors in the pathogenesis of PE has gained the most attention in the past decade.Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a member of VEGF family, is a major angiogenic factor and potential regulator of endothelial cell proliferation [5]. During pregnancy, VEGF is essential for the proliferation of trophoblasts, the development of embryonic vasculature, and the growth of maternal and foetal blood cells in utero [6]. The human VEGF gene is located on chromosome 6p21.3 and consists of 8 exons with alternate splicing, forming a family of proteins. Several studies have been performed to elucidate its significance in PE. Emerging evidence suggested that VEGF is elevated in PE and correlates with the severity of disease [7]–[10]. Although sources have found depressed levels of VEGF in the sera of PE women [11]–[14], these results can be explained by the fact that quantification of VEGF in pregnancy is affected by interference from binding proteins [15]. The immediate importance of VEGF lies in its implications for the early identification of PE. Bosio PM, et al. [16] performed a longitudinal study, which VEGF levels were measured serially from 10 weeks' gestation, and found VEGF levels were elevated from 28 weeks onwards in women who subsequently developed PE. Similar with Bosio’s results, Hunter A, et al. [17] also performed a similar prospective study and found that VEGF levels in women with PE were significantly different from normotensive women beginning at 30 weeks' gestation. These data suggest the potential role of VEGF in the pathogenesis of PE, and abnormal VEGF levels in pregnancy before the clinical onset of PE may be useful as a predictive marker.There are several common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the VEGF gene, including +936 (rs3025039), −634 (rs2010963), −1154 (rs1570360), and −2578 (rs699947) positions, which could alter gene expression and protein production, and alter the risk of developing diseases characterized by deranged angiogenesis [18]–[20]. Over the past decade, considerable epidemiological studies have focused on associations between VEGF polymorphisms and PE susceptibility. However, the results remain controversial or inconclusive. To address this issue, we performed an updated systemic review and a meta-analysis of all eligible case-control studies to provide insights into the associations between VEGF polymorphisms and susceptibility to PE, which may promote our understanding of the exact role of VEGF gene in the etiology of PE and early identification of the patients at risk of PE.
