Eclampsia is characterized by grand mal seizures that cannot be attributed to other causes in women with the human pregnancy-specific disorder preeclampsia. The clinical manifestations of maternal preeclampsia are hypertension and proteinuria with or without coexisting systemic abnormalities involving the kidneys, liver, or blood. There is also a fetal manifestation of preeclampsia involving fetal growth restriction, reduced amniotic fluid, and abnormal fetal oxygenation [1]. Eclampsia manifests as one or more grand mal seizures. Worldwide, eclampsia is estimated to complicate 1.4% of all deliveries [2]. In developed countries, maternal deaths from eclampsia are rare, but in developing countries the mortality rate can be as high as 15% [3].Although described by Hippocrates around 400 BCE [4], the pathogenesis of eclampsia remains poorly understood. This is partly because no animal model of eclampsia has been developed to date to facilitate the study of this disorder. Such a model could increase understanding of the pathophysiology of eclampsia and contribute to the development of novel therapeutics for its management.In contrast, a number of animal models of preeclampsia have been developed and successfully used to explore aspects of this disease. The first animal model of preeclampsia was developed by ultra low dose endotoxin infusion in pregnant rats [5]. Since then, other methods such as reduced uterine perfusion pressure, induction of uteroplacental ischemia and some pharmacological treatments have also been found to mimic key features of the disease such as hypertension and proteinuria [6]–[8]. As well, data derived from such animal models as well as from human studies has demonstrated an important role for inflammatory mediators and angiogenic modulators in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia [9]–[11].The aim of this study therefore was to use an established animal model of preeclampsia to develop an animal model of eclampsia to enable future studies on the pathogenesis and management of eclampsia. To this end, an endotoxin infusion rat preeclampsia model was treated with the epileptogenic agent pentylenetetrazol (PTZ) to create an eclamptic model. This model and its response to the clinically relevant anticonvulsant drug magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) were then characterized in terms of various seizure, biometric and biochemical parameters to evaluate its potential utility as a research tool.
