Pre-eclampsia is a systemic syndrome affecting cardiovascular, renal and hepatic systems and is associated with increased maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality [1]–[4]. Proteinuria is the main finding used to distinguish pre-eclampsia from the lower risk conditions of gestational and chronic hypertension in pregnancy, although other symptoms may also indicate the presence of the disease in the absence of proteinuria. The current International Society for the Study of Hypertension in Pregnancy (ISSHP) research definition of pre-eclampsia is systolic blood pressure ≥140mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ≥90mmHg with proteinuria of at least 1+ on urine dipstick occurring on 2 occasions after 20 weeks gestation, whereas that for gestational hypertension is the same criteria for high blood pressure but without co-occurrence of proteinuria [5].Whether isolated gestational proteinuria (i.e. without concomitant high blood pressure) is part of the pre-eclampsia disease continuum is unclear. The classic biological markers of pre-eclampsia; soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and soluble endoglin show intermediate increases (between normal and pre-eclampsia) in women with isolated gestational proteinuria [6], [7]. The clinical literature assessing disease progression from isolated proteinuria to pre-eclampsia is limited, however. A case study of 37 women reported progression from isolated gestational proteinuria to full pre-eclampsia in 19 (51%) women [8] and in two retrospective clinical cohort studies of women with eclampsia, 9.8 and 7.5% respectively had proteinuria alone in the week prior to the first convulsion [9], [10].If isolated gestational proteinuria is indeed a form of mild pre-eclampsia or an early manifestation of it that occurs before blood pressure risk in some women, we would anticipate that established pre-eclampsia risk factors; maternal pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI), age, nulliparity and multiple pregnancy would all be positively associated with the occurrence of isolated proteinuria [11], and conversely smoking would be protective [12], [13]. Secondly, if disease progression was likely, we would hypothesise that women who experienced isolated gestational proteinuria would have higher blood pressure at the end of pregnancy than women without proteinuria. Lastly, we would anticipate blood pressure in very early pregnancy also to be higher in these women, in keeping with an established enhanced vascular risk that is uncovered by the physiological stress of pregnancy [14]. In the current study we have tested these three hypotheses in a large prospective cohort study which routinely recorded antenatal dipstick proteinuria assessment.
