Recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) is defined as having had at least two consecutive embryo miscarriages within the first or early second trimester of pregnancy [1]. RSA affects approximately 1% to 5% of reproductive age women[2,3]. Various factors have been identified that are thought to play a role in about 50% of cases of RSA including genetic, endocrine, anatomical or autoimmune issues and infections. However the mechanism involved in the other 50% of RSAs remains unexplained (Unexplained RSA) [4,5]. Recent studies have indicated that placental ischemia/hypoxia and endothelial dysfunction may contribute to cases of RSA [6,7]. Yet the pathogenesis has not been fully elucidated and is still a matter of debate. Recent studies reported that sFlt-1 levels are markedly decreased in RSA patients [8,9]. However, in another study, expression levels of sFlt-1 mRNA and VEGF mRNA were found to be significantly higher in the chorionic villus tissue of women with RSA than in the control group [10].Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a multifunctional cytokine that is produced by a variety of cell types, including the placenta. VEGF modulates physiological and pathophysiological vascular development [11]. Several studies have indicated that the biological activity of VEGF is regulated by a soluble portion of the fms-like tyrosine kinase (Flt-1) receptor (sFlt-1), an endogenous inhibitor of VEGF, which may play an important role in endothelial dysfunction. Excess circulating sFlt-1 binds to VEGF with high affinity, thereby neutralizing it [12]. Clark et al. reported that sFlt-1 dramatically increases over the course of gestation and then dramatically falls soon after delivery. It has been hypothesized that the placenta is the primary source of this circulating anti-angiogenic factor[13].Two-thirds of pregnancies that are lost to miscarriage are believed to be due to defective placentation associated with an absence of physiological changes in maternal spiral arteries [14]. Some recent studies suggest that a dysregulation of the angiogenic factors, VEGF and its solute receptor sFlt-1, may be involved in the pathophysiology of miscarriage [8,15]. Interestingly, other recent studies have shown that high levels of sFlt1 are associated with pre-eclampsia. In later pregnancy circulating sFlt-1 is increased in preeclampsia and also in other pregnancy complications hypoxia [16,17]. These results indicate that circulating sFlt-1 is elevated in preeclampsia during late gestation. The VEGF increase is much more dramatic, resulting in a high level of unbound or ‘‘free’’ VEGF in the system. A poorly vascularized (hypoxic) placenta stimulates excessive sFlt-1 production. The sFLt-1 is released into the maternal circulation throughout gestation, binding VEGF, which leads to endothelial dysfunction and hypertension. It has been well established that early embryo development in the human occurs in a hypoxic environment [11]. Tintu A et al. [18] reports that chronic hypoxia in early chick embryos resulted in increased sFlt-1 levels. However, the mechanisms by which VEGF and sFlt-1 induce miscarriage remain unclear. Specifically, the exact time when the over expression of VEGF and sFlt-1 induces miscarriage and/or the significance of high levels of VEGF and sFlt-1 cannot be determined. Thus we hypothesized that, in RSA patients, it is possible that a poorly vascularized (hypoxic) placenta stimulates excessive sFlt-1 and VEGF production throughout early gestation, stimulating additional sFlt-1 release, leading to endothelial dysfunction and miscarriage. A prospective study was conducted to test the hypothesis that under a hypoxic environment, sFlt-1 increases in the serum and chorionic villus during early pregnancy resulting in vascular-endothelial dysfunction and subsequent miscarriage.
