Preeclampsia affects 3%[1] of all pregnancies. It is a systemic disease with a multifactorial background. Preeclampsia is diagnosed when a pregnant woman develops hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks of gestation. Recent recommendation by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [2] further proposes that in the absence of proteinuria, preeclampsia could be diagnosed when newly diagnosed hypertension occurs in association with thrombocytopenia, impaired liver function, new development of renal insufficiency, pulmonary edema, or new-onset cerebral or visual disturbances.Preeclampsia can be life-threatening both to the mother and the unborn child. Due to its multifactorial etiology, the outcome and progression of preeclampsia is challenging to predict. The role of the placenta is important in the pathogenesis, and the clinical findings are a consequence of endothelial dysfunction [3]. The disease can be roughly divided into early-onset and late-onset subtypes which evidently rise from different etiopathogenic backgrounds [4]. Early-onset disease is associated with placental dysfunction. It is often accompanied by intrauterine growth restriction, the risk runs in families and women with history of early-onset preeclampsia have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease later in life [5]. Late-onset preeclampsia develops due to metabolic disturbances, obesity, diabetes, lipid dysfunction, and inflammation [6] all of which affect endothelial function. Placental hypoplasia and vascular lesions frequently present in early-onset disease are often absent in the late-onset disease [7].Using vasoactive markers, placental growth factor (PlGF) and soluble vasoactive endothelial growth factor reseptor-1 (s-Flt1), preeclampsia can be divided into angiogenic and non-angiogenetic subgroups [8]. Early-onset and severe preeclampsia seem to form predominantly the angiogenetic subtype and non-angiogenic subtype has milder and later course of the disease [9].Recently encouraging progress has been achieved in the field of preeclampsia prevention [10]. Meta-analyses show that low-dose aspirin initiated in the early precnancy in high-risk women may prevent early and severe preeclampsia or at least delay the onset of the disease [11,12]. However, preeclampsia is a heterogenic disorder. There are great challenges in predicting who will eventually develop severe or early-onset disease and, accordingly, benefit most from the use of aspirin.The present study explores the features of this high-risk cohort.The aim was to explore predicting factors affecting the onset and severity of preeclampsia. We used cluster analysis in a prospectively collected cohort of women with known clinical risk factors for preeclampsia. We will discuss the findings in the context of current recommendations for initiating aspirin to prevent preeclampsia in high-risk women.
