Cholera represents a risk of complications for pregnant women and their fetus. Published literature reports fetal loss rates during cholera episodes of between 2% and 36% [1–7]. However, comparison of pregnancy outcomes among different reports is difficult, due to differences in inclusion criteria, treatment provided, and access to care. Although the exact cause of fetal death during a cholera episode has not yet been identified, several studies suggest an association between fetal loss and the degree of dehydration and hypovolemia [2,4–7].In cholera-endemic countries, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends vaccination “for groups that are especially vulnerable to severe disease and for which the vaccines are not contraindicated, such as pregnant women and HIV-infected individuals” [8]. WHO has prequalified two oral cholera vaccines (OCV), both consist of killed whole-cells of V. cholerae. One consists of several strains of V. cholerae O1 and a recombinant B subunit of the cholera toxin (WC-rBS, marketed as Dukoral); the other contains strains from both serogroups O1 and O139, but no component of the cholera toxin (BivWC, marketed as Shanchol) [8]. According to the package inserts, neither vaccine is contraindicated in pregnant women, but only recommended when the potential benefits are considered higher than the risk. Inactivated OCVs are unlikely to have a harmful effect on fetal development as the killed bacteria in the vaccine do not replicate, the vaccine antigens act locally in the gastrointestinal mucosa, are not absorbed and do not enter the maternal or fetal circulation. In addition, the vaccines do not trigger systemic reactions (e.g. fever) associated with miscarriage in early pregnancy [9].Pre-licensure studies and post-marketing surveillance suggest that Dukoral has a good safety profile when used during pregnancy [4] and inadvertent vaccination of pregnant women with the vaccine during a mass vaccination campaign in Zanzibar in 2009 was not associated with any harmful effects [9]. However, pregnant women have been excluded systematically from most other cholera vaccination campaigns because of the weak data on safety during pregnancy for Dukoral and the absence of safety data during pregnancy for Shanchol [10]. Shanchol has several advantages compared with Dukoral for public health use. The vaccine is cheaper, has a lower storage volume and does not require water for administration. Thus, understanding the safety of BivWC during pregnancy will provide essential information for its future use throughout the cholera-endemic world.The Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene (MHPH) of Guinea, with the support of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), carried out mass OCV campaigns using BivWC in 2012 in Boffa and Forécariah Prefectures as part of a comprehensive response to a cholera epidemic that was spreading in remote rural areas with limited access to health facilities [11,12]. These campaigns targeted all people aged one year and above living in the target areas [11,12]. Pregnant women were not excluded from the target population.In order to assess whether there was a difference in pregnancy outcomes between women who exposed their fetus to OCV and those who did not, we report the results of a retrospective cohort study, which compared the incidence of pregnancy losses (miscarriages and stillbirths) and malformations between these two groups.
