Preterm birth is defined as delivery before the completion of the 37th week of gestation and affects 13 percent (542 893 births in 2006) of live births in the United States (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/birthwt.htm) [1]. Approximately 40 percent of preterm births occur after the spontaneous onset of preterm labor [2]. Long-term neonatal sequelae of prematurity such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia, grade III/IV intraventricular hemorrhage and retinopathy of prematurity determine the overall quality of life for the child and the family.Terbutaline sulfate has been used off-label in selected patients as a maintenance therapy to inhibit uterine contractions for extended periods of time following primary tocolysis with first-line agents. Terbutaline, a β-sympathomimetic drug, acts to relax smooth muscle in the bronchial tree, blood vessels and myometrium [3]. Maternal side effects are common, and can include serious adverse reactions such as pulmonary edema, myocardial ischemia, cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, and metabolic alterations [3]. Despite previous reviews which questioned the effectiveness and safety of subcutaneous terbutaline infusion, the use of such therapy is not uncommon in the United States [3], [4]. The exact frequency of use of subcutaneous terbutaline infusion for the prevention of preterm birth is not known.This review, commissioned by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality through its established stakeholder topic nomination process, aims to systematically review and meta-analyze the evidence examining the efficacy, effectiveness, and harms of SQ terbutaline pump for preventing preterm labor, compared with placebo, conservative treatment, or any other active intervention. We investigated the clinical effectiveness and harms of pump therapy by systematically retrieving, appraising and synthesizing evidence on neonatal health outcomes and outcomes of maternal and neonatal harm. Surrogate outcomes, such as birthweight and prolongation of pregnancy were also examined. The potential confounding effects of maternal activity and maternal care on the above endpoints were explored, as was the incidence of pump-related outcomes. Particularly in light of a recent “black box” warning issued by the FDA, this review provides a contemporary and definitive summary of the available literature on the benefits and harms of terbutaline maintenance tocolysis.
