During pregnancy, maternal thyroid hormone levels exhibit large changes due to the influence of varying hormone levels, and thyroid dysfunction is related to many adverse outcomes in both mothers and fetuses, such as preterm delivery, intrauterine growth restriction, preeclampsia and lower birth weight [1–3]. Gestational hypothyroxemia refers to a lower serum free thyroxin (FT4) level that is less than 10% of the reference with the normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level [4]. Isolated maternal hypothyroxemia (IMH) is the thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb)-negative type of hypothyroxemia. In our population, the prevalence of maternal thyroid dysfunction is 15.0%. Given the prevalence and adverse outcomes related to maternal thyroid dysfunction, many studies which focused on improving pregnancy outcomes by screening pregnant women for thyroid disease have been conducted in the past few years [5–8]. Our previous study demonstrated that low thyroid hormone levels in early pregnancy are a risk factor for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) [9]. However, in most of the IMH studies, the FT4 levels were measured before 20 weeks of pregnancy and were not measured in the later trimesters of pregnancy [5, 10–13]. Maternal FT4 levels must be monitored in both the first and third trimesters of pregnancy, and its relationship with adverse pregnancy outcomes must be evaluated. In the present study, we aimed to explore the correlation between the FT4 levels in the first trimester or third trimester of pregnancy and adverse pregnancy outcomes.Because thyroxin affects important metabolic pathways such as AMPK (Adenosine 5’-monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase) pathway and PI3K/Akt pathway, altered levels of metabolites in patients with hypothyroxemia have been the focus of many thyroid disease studies [14–16]. In recent years, metabolomic studies have provided the advanced methods necessary to identify changing metabolite levels, resulting in rapid progress in disease biomarker discovery [17–19]. A metabolomic analysis using serum samples from patients with hypothyroxemia has not been reported. We hypothesized that metabolites such as adenosine or its analogues which were involved in AMPK signaling pathway may be altered in patients with hypothyroxemia. In the present study, we identified the serum metabolites by metabolomics analysis in patients with hypothyroxemia to address the potential relationship between gestational hypothyroxemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes.
