Cultivation of fertilized oocytes and the subsequent selection of embryos is a vital step in assisted reproductive technology. Since the inception of clinical in vitro fertilization (IVF), most laboratories have routinely selected embryos on the basis of morphological characteristics. This method requires moving embryos outside the controlled environment of the incubator for microscopic examination. However, owing to the potentially deleterious effect of exposure embryos to undesirable changes in culture environment when evaluated, inspection of embryo morphology is limited to snapshots at a few discrete time points (usually once a day), reducing the amount of information that could be obtained and important developmental events might be missed. Conventional embryo selection methods are commonly associated with relatively low clinical pregnancy rate of approximately 30% per transfer [1]. Nowadays, promoting of single embryo transfer (SET) and minimizing the rate of multi-pregnancy put higher demand on the efficiency of identifying the most viable embryo for transfer, and many new technologies aiming at improving embryo selection have be developed[2, 3].Time-lapse imaging (TLI) is an emerging technology, clinical available TLI systems allow continuous observation of embryo development without removal from controlled and stable incubator condition. TLI systems may improve outcomes of IVF cycles over conventional methods due to several potential advantages. First, decreased frequency of handling and exposure of embryos to suboptimal conditions eliminates the risks of stress from temperature changes, high oxygen exposures and pH changes in the culture medium and thus provides improved culture conditions. Second, by serial imaging, more information on embryo development is obtained. TLI allows embryologists to assess the quality of embryos by tracking the timing of events and length of different intervals in embryo development (also refers to as morphokinetic monitoring), adds another dimension to embryo selecting and grading. Until now, a number of studies have been conducted regarding whether morphokinetic variables are correlated with important outcomes such as blastocyst formation[4–8], implantation potential[9, 10], pregnancy potential[11, 12] and even aneuploidy status[13–16]. Several predictive algorithms based on morphokinetic parameters and time-lapse evaluation have been proposed[8, 12, 17–19].As stated, the potential benefit of clinical TLI may be due to improved incubation or improved embryo selection or both, the relative contribution of each variable needs to be acknowledged. Available RCTs detecting the effectiveness of TLI so far can be divided in to 3 types: studies comparing TLI incubation to conventional incubation, studies assessing the overall impact of TLI to conventional methods and studies focusing on the potential effect of TLI morphokinetic monitoring and embryo selection. A few meta-analyses and systematic reviews evaluating TLI have been published including a Cochrane meta-analysis[20–23]. However, these reviews focused on either the mixed effect of TLI or the effect of TLI selection alone.On the other hand, distinct light exposure, heat due to motion, friction of moving parts, presence of magnetic fields, sheer stress of moving culture dishes and lubricants related to TLI systems may bring harmful effect on embryo quality. Considering the conflicting results of studies comparing TLI incubation to conventional incubation, the safety of TLI systems needs to reconfirm[24–28]. Besides, increased embryo assessment time (301.2 seconds vs. 137.6 seconds up to Day 3)[28], considerable increased expense of equipment and consumable materials and extra space needed on the laboratory are the disadvantages of TLI which make assisted reproduction even less accessible. As such, it is urgent to perform a meta-analysis and systematic review on larger samples to comprehensively compare the effectiveness of TLI to conventional methods and provide a more precise estimation of TLI clinical use.
