PE appears to be a heterogeneous condition within which many pathogenetic routes converging on similar phenotypes have been implicated—permitting it well deserving of its often-claimed title as the “disease of theories”. Since the initial study delving into miR expression in PE by Pineles et al. [30], a wave of studies examining miR expression in PE have steadily emerged and the tide of data risen ever higher with no clear consensus on which, and how, miRs may associate with pathogenesis.In spite of this, and methodological variation among studies, certain miRs have emerged repeatedly and appear to associate strongly with PE. Many elucidated in this review, such as miR-210, miR-223 and miR-126/126*, impinge on a spectrum of diseases. Through candidate studies each can be intertwined with some proposed aspect of PE pathogenesis—as with hypoxia and the HIF-1α/miR-210/ISCU pathway towards mitochondrial abnormalities. Other PE-associated miRs segregate into distinct families with predominately placental expression patterns, such as the prolific miR-515 family clustered within the expansive, primate-specific C19MC. Epigenetic alterations may hold the key to aberrant expression of this cluster. This paternally-imprinted cluster, whose members appear prevalent in secreted exosomes, could be a means by which the fetus modulates adverse maternal immune responses. However, many C19MC miRs, such as miR-518b, still lack verified target genes outside of cancer-based studies, despite frequent association with PE. Further investigation is therefore essential in order to understand their precise contributions. By expanding the question of contribution towards PE classification, certain miRs appear to correlate with PE severity—as with miR-210, -223 and -181a. Some miR families and clusters may also be closely tied to more severe forms of PE, such as the miR-106a/363 cluster and miR-15 precursor family from which the prevalent miR-195 and -16 emerge. Patterns of miR expression could help link similar pathological processes to particular classifications of PE, resolving ambiguity, for example, between eoPE and sPE cases. Exploring these questions further may therefore prove useful in disentangling the web of PE definitions through strongly associating miRs linked to pathogenic pathways (e.g. IL-6/miR-223/STAT3) and beyond this, for ascertaining the clinical value of miRs.PE-associated miRs have the potential to serve as viable biomarkers of the condition. This could be through the creation of miR-based panels with the capacity to aid in diagnosis, heralding the onset and/or severity of PE. In a therapeutic context, transiently modulating the expression of genes implicated in pathways relating to pathogenesis using miR mimics and inhibitors may also have clinical value, as with miR-126 mimics and the angiogenesis-related PIK3R2/PI3K/Akt pathway. However, a current lack of consensus across studies with regards to PE-associated miRs limits their capacity to be of wider, practical clinical value. Ultimately, any clinical value is predicated upon resolving current methodological challenges which may account for variability in results, allowing for a greater degree of standardization among studies. Challenges include the definition and classification of PE used, sampling technique, RNA extraction method and crucially, the chosen platform for miR profiling. Furthermore, accurate PE animal models will continue to prove important for allowing more rigorous determinations of miR functionality in the context of entire biological systems.Overall, this systematic review touches upon a promising and expanding area of research, propelled by new technologies, such as NGS, which are better able to clarify the pictures formed by prior studies, and driven by the ever-present threat of the condition. It is hoped that further exploration of miR expression in PE, including a systems-level approach to unearthing target genes and pathways, will continue to inform domains which may be of relevance to pathogenesis and advance our present understanding of PE.
