Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP) are a group of common medical complications in pregnancy, and also a major cause of maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity [1]. The prevalence of HDP is 8–10% of all pregnancies in the population worldwide [2]. It can develop during pregnancy or delivery, and its clinical presentation is characterized by hypertension, proteinuria and edema. HDP can also trigger some severe forms of maternal complications, such as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, liver and kidney failure, placental abruption, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and HELLP syndrome. Under these circumstances, the placenta dysfunction may occur, leading to fetal growth restriction, fetal distress, preterm birth, intrauterine fetal demise, stillbirth and neonatal asphyxia. While HDP has been described as a maternal complications over the last several decades [3], its true etiology and pathophysiology remains unknown; HDP-related complications are still threatening maternal and fetal life and health. The prognosis of HDP is associated with the severity of disease process. In general, the more severe the disease is, the poorer prognosis is. Despite a massive research effort, there was also lack of efficient therapeutic methods in clinic at present. For the unpredictable characteristic and potential poor prognosis, symptomatic treatment to relieve clinical symptoms and timely termination of pregnancy were the main treatment measures, which can effectively increase curative rate and decrease complication rate and mortality.Over the past few decades, relevant literatures about HDP have been focused on a small sample of individual hospitals or a single complication, lacking of large-scale samples with multi-variables research. Such previous works were not sufficient to provide detailed information for the current situation of HDP. Accordingly, our study was designed to perform a comprehensive retrospective survey with a large-scale sample collected at 38 hospitals across 14 provinces and regions in China mainland. The aims of this survey were to analyze the prevalence and possible risk factors of HDP, to investigate the effect of HDP and HDP related complications on maternal and perinatal outcomes.
