Preeclampsia, defined as the new onset of hypertension and proteinuria after the 20th week of gestation, is a life-threatening complication of pregnancy that afflicts 1–7% of all pregnancies [1–4]. Numerous organs are affected by preeclampsia, including the brain in the form of eclampsia [5–9]. Eclampsia is the appearance of unexplained seizure in a woman with preeclampsia and is one of the most dangerous complications of pregnancy [4]. Eclampsia is a leading cause of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality worldwide that accounts for greater than 50,000 maternal deaths each year [6, 7, 10]. While eclampsia by definition is restricted to women with preeclampsia, seizure during pregnancy does not appear to be a progression from severe preeclampsia to eclampsia [11–13]. In fact, de novo seizure has been reported to occur in 38% of seemingly uncomplicated pregnancies, without hypertension and proteinuria, or the diagnosis of preeclampsia [12]. The finding that de novo seizure occurs in the absence of preeclampsia suggests that pregnancy alone may be a state of increased seizure susceptibility. In addition, women who develop eclampsia are by definition normotensive and asymptomatic prior to pregnancy, with no known underlying conditions contributing to seizure onset, supporting the concept that pregnancy alone may predispose the brain to seizure independently of preeclampsia.It is well-established that fluctuations in neurosteroids occur during the menstrual cycle, and to a greater extent during pregnancy, that can affect neuronal excitability [14–16]. Specifically, increases in progesterone metabolites, including allopregnanolone, act as positive allosteric modulators of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAARs), the main inhibitory neurotransmitter receptors in the brain, and decrease neuronal excitability [16]. GABAARs consist of several subunits, however, the main binding site and therefore site of action of allopregnanolone is on the δ-subunit [17]. δ-subunit-containing GABAARs (GABAAR-δ) are located extrasynaptically and are involved in tonic inhibition throughout the brain [16]. Neuroactive steroids such as allopregnanolone reduce neuronal excitability selectively through actions at GABAAR-δ; however, GABAAR-δ are downregulated in response to increased allopregnanolone to maintain the excitatory/inhibitory balance [16, 17]. Plasticity of the δ-subunit of GABAARs occurs in the brain during pregnancy, and is an adaptation that likely functions to maintain a steady state of excitability in the face of increased neurosteroids [17, 18]. In fact, brain slices from pregnant mice were found to be hyperexcitable due to the downregulation of the δ-subunit that was normalized by the presence of allopregnanolone [18]. While these in-vitro studies suggest that the brain is hyperexcitable during pregnancy, it is less clear if the brain is more susceptible to seizure under normal physiological conditions of pregnancy where naturally circulating neurosteroids are present. Further, synaptic γ2-subunit-containing GABAARs (GABAAR-γ2) are involved in phasic inhibition and have also been shown to decrease expression in the brain during pregnancy [19]. Although synaptic GABAAR-γ2 are not affected by neurosteroids [16], pregnancy-induced changes in their expression may also contribute to increased seizure susceptibility during pregnancy.One mechanism by which brain excitability may be affected during pregnancy is through peripheral inflammation. Pregnancy is considered a state of mild peripheral inflammation and peripheral inflammation has been shown to cause neuroinflammation through the activation of microglia, the resident immune cells in the brain [20, 21]. When microglia become active, they aid in clearance of debris and play a reparative role in the brain; however, for unknown reasons they can become cytotoxic [22]. Active microglia secrete proinflammatory cytokines and increase local neuronal excitability by simultaneously promoting the endocytosis of GABAARs and exocytosis of excitatory α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors [21, 23]. In fact, neuroinflammation has recently been shown to be present in a rat model of preeclampsia that was associated with decreased seizure threshold [24]. Whether neuroinflammation is present during normal pregnancy is unknown, however, it may be one mechanism by which the pregnant state is more susceptible to seizure. We hypothesized that pregnancy is a state of increased seizure susceptibility due to decreased expression of GABAARs and/or neuroinflammation that acts to lower seizure threshold.Onset of eclampsia may also be related to loss of cerebral blood flow autoregulation and decreased cerebrovascular resistance that increases pressure on the microcirculation and subsequent vasogenic edema formation [25]. In fact, vasogenic edema is present in ~ 90% of women with eclampsia, as assessed by diffusion weighted MRI [26, 27]. Further, vasogenic edema formation occurs to a greater extent during pregnancy under pathologic conditions such as acute hypertension, suggesting pregnancy predisposes the brain to edema [28, 29]. Thus, we hypothesized that the maternal brain is more susceptible to seizure-induced vasogenic edema formation than in the nonpregnant state. Understanding if the maternal brain is more susceptible to seizure-induced edema may lead to a greater understanding of the pathophysiological process of de novo seizure during pregnancy.
