An ectopic pregnancy (EP) occurs when a fertilised ovum implants at a site outside the uterine cavity. The commonest location is within the fallopian tube, and the condition remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality due to the associated risks of tubal rupture and intra-abdominal haemorrhage. Between 2003 and 2005, EPs accounted for 72% of early pregnancy deaths in the United Kingdom [1]. Suggested risk factors include pelvic infection, smoking, previous pelvic surgery, sterilisation, use of certain types of intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCD), a previous ectopic pregnancy, and older maternal age [2],[3]. In recent years, early diagnosis has meant that maternal deaths due to EP have become increasingly rare in the developed world and the clinical emphasis has now shifted to preservation of fertility [4]. To assess the existing evidence regarding reproductive outcomes following ectopic pregnancy, we conducted a literature search in Ovid MEDLINE (1966–2008), EMBASE (1996–2008), and CINAHL (1986–2008) using the search terms “ectopic=", “pregnancy or gestation=", and “outcomes=". Several papers on risk factors for tubal EP were identified [5],[6], but few studies explored pregnancy outcomes following an ectopic gestation comparing them to those following intrauterine pregnancies. Two studies specifically addressing this issue reported conflicting results. Hassan and Killick [7] reported a 3-fold increase in conception rates following EP, while a much larger study based on the EP registry in Auvergne, France [8] found no independent effect of ruptured tubal EP on subsequent fertility. In France, the Auvergne registry collects data on all ectopic pregnancies occurring in a geographically defined area and several articles based on this register have been published. These articles, although providing an insight into the epidemiology of EP, do not present comparisons with intrauterine pregnancies.The relationship between fertility and EP is of interest to researchers and clinicians because the same underlying pathology, for example tubal damage, may result in both infertility and ectopic pregnancy. The factor underlying reduced fertility and recurrence of EP is possibly pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). Westrom et al. [9] found that rates of EP in women diagnosed with PID by laparoscopy were 9.1% versus 1.4% in those without PID. Moreover, the shift in management strategies for EP towards tubal conservation may have improved fertility but contributed to increased recurrence.Our aim was to investigate, in a population-based cohort of women, reproductive outcomes after an initial EP and compare them to outcomes following successful or unsuccessful intrauterine pregnancies.
