
Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene cause cystic fibrosis (CF) and are associated with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), which is the major cause of infertility in male patients with CF. However, most Taiwanese patients with CBAVD do not carry major CFTR mutations. Some patients have a single copy deletion of the solute carrier family 9 isoform 3 (SLC9A3) gene. SLC9A3 is a Na+/H+ exchanger, and depleted Slc9a3 in male mice causes infertility due to the abnormal dilated lumen of the rete testis and efferent ductules. Furthermore, SLC9A3 interacts with CFTR in the pancreatic duct and functions as a genetic modifier of CF. However, SLC9A3 function and its relation to CFTR expression in the male reproductive tract in vivo remain elusive. In the present study, we found that CFTR expression was dramatically decreased in the epididymis and vas deferens of Slc9a3 knockout mice. Adult Slc9a3-/- mice showed not only significantly decreased epididymis and vas deferens weight but also increased testis weight. Furthermore, Slc9a3-/- mice developed obstructive azoospermia because of abnormal abundant secretions and calcification in the lumen of the reproductive tract. Ultrastructural analysis of the epithelium in Slc9a3–/–epididymis and vas deferens displayed disorganized and reduced number of stereocilia and numerous secretory apparatuses. Our data revealed that interdependence between SLC9A3 and CFTR is critical for maintaining a precise microenvironment in the epithelial cytoarchitecture of the male reproductive tract. The Slc9a3-deficient mice with impaired male excurrent ducts in this study provide proof for our clinical findings that some Taiwanese of CBAVD carry SLC9A3 deletion but without major CFTR mutations.
Author summary: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common inherited life-threatening disease in Caucasians. The most well-known cause of CF is a genetic defect in CFTR, an apical membrane chloride and bicarbonate channel. The symptoms of CF include defects in the respiratory, digestive, and male reproductive systems. Most male patients with CF are infertile due to congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), which leads to obstructive azoospermia. Nevertheless, Taiwanese patients with CBAVD do not carry the common mutations of CFTR found in Caucasians. We have identified a potential candidate, SLC9A3, of which a single copy is lost in Taiwanese patients with CBAVD. In addition to the previously reported role of SLC9A3 in the digestive system and efferent ductules, we now report that the SLC9A3 deficiency causes obstructive azoospermia and impairs the epithelial structure of the reproductive tract. Loss of SLC9A3 also leads to dramatic reduced expression of CFTR in the reproductive tract. We suggest that the interplay between SLC9A3 and CFTR is responsible for CF-related infertility. Thus, we have characterized a potential critical player in the pathogenesis of CBAVD and provide a new diagnostic candidate for Asian patients with CBAVD. 
