Background: Many factors from the oocyte/sperm or the process of fertilization may affect the zygote formation. The zygote score (Z-score) describes the quality of a human zygote based on its pronuclear morphology, nucleolar precursor bodies, and alignment of polar bodies, and it can be used in the selection process at the zygote stage for embryo transfer or cryopreservation. Objective: The aim of this retrospective cohort study was to investigate the relationship between different controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) protocols and the zygote score (Z-score) and to assess the feasibility of the Z-score for predicting embryo survival in the GnRH-antagonist (GnRH-ant) protocol. Methods: It is a retrospective, single-center cohort study. A total of 3,826 zygotes with normal fertilization were analyzed from 744 in vitro fertilization /intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (IVF/ICSI) cycles (long protocol n = 392; GnRH-ant n = 352) between Jan 2010 and April 2014 in the IVF unit of Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital Kaohsiung Medical Center. Results: The Z-score distribution differed significantly between these two protocols. The overall Z-score was poorer for zygotes from GnRH-ant cycles (p<0.05). Univariate and multivariate analyses indicated the type of COS protocol is one of the main determinants of Z-score grading. Our study found good-quality day 3 embryo/blastocyst formation and the cumulative embryo survival rate were correlated with the Z-score but not the COS protocol. With the GnRH-ant protocol, the number of Z1 in the transferred cohort embryos was significantly correlated with the clinical pregnancy rate (r = 0.976; p = 0.024) and live birth rate (r = 0.971; p = 0.029). This correlation was not seen with the long protocol. Conclusions: The Z-score distribution for the GnRH antagonist cycles was poorer than that of the long protocol, but the Z-score system is a valuable parameter for predicting embryo viability in the GnRH-ant protocol, providing a strong correlation with the clinical pregnancy rate and live birth rate. 
