Infertility affects about one in six couples attempting pregnancy, with the man responsible in approximately half of the cases. Because the pathophysiology underlying azoospermia is not elucidated, most male infertility is diagnosed as idiopathic. Genome-wide gene expression analyses with microarray on testis specimens from 47 non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) and 11 obstructive azoospermia (OA) patients were performed, and 2,611 transcripts that preferentially included genes relevant to gametogenesis and reproduction according to Gene Ontology classification were found to be differentially expressed. Using a set of 945 of the 2,611 transcripts without missing data, NOA was further categorized into three classes using the non-negative matrix factorization method. Two of the three subclasses were different from the OA group in Johnsen's score, FSH level, and/or LH level, while there were no significant differences between the other subclass and the OA group. In addition, the 52 genes showing high statistical difference between NOA subclasses (p < 0.01 with Tukey's post hoc test) were subjected to allelic association analyses to identify genetic susceptibilities. After two rounds of screening, SNPs of the ADP-ribosyltransferase 3 gene (ART3) were associated with NOA with highest significance with ART3-SNP25 (rs6836703; p = 0.0025) in 442 NOA patients and 475 fertile men. Haplotypes with five SNPs were constructed, and the most common haplotype was found to be under-represented in patients (NOA 26.6% versus control 35.3%, p = 0.000073). Individuals having the most common haplotype showed an elevated level of testosterone, suggesting a protective effect of the haplotype on spermatogenesis. Thus, genome-wide gene expression analyses were used to identify genes involved in the pathogenesis of NOA, and ART3 was subsequently identified as a susceptibility gene for NOA. These findings clarify the molecular pathophysiology of NOA and suggest a novel therapeutic target in the treatment of NOA.: Worldwide, approximately 15% of couples attempting pregnancy meet with failure. Male factors are thought to be responsible in 20%–50% of all infertility cases. Azoospermia, the absence of sperm in the ejaculate due to defects in its production or delivery is common in male infertility. In this study, we focused on non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) because the etiologies of obstructive azoospermia are well studied and distinct from those of NOA. Microdeletions of the Y chromosome are thus far the only genetic defects known to affect human spermatogenesis, but most cases of NOA are unsolved. Because NOA results from a variety of defects in the developmental stages of spermatogenesis, the stage-specific expressions of genes in the testes must be investigated. Thus, genome-wide gene expression analyses of testes of NOA can provide insight into the several etiologies and genetic susceptibilities of NOA. In the present study, we analyzed several differentially expressed genes in NOA subclasses and identified ART3 as a susceptibility gene for NOA. 
