
        A significant percentage of young men are infertile and, for the majority, the underlying cause remains unknown. Male infertility is, however, frequently associated with defective sperm motility, wherein the sperm tail is a modified flagella/cilia. Conversely, a greater understanding of essential mechanisms involved in tail formation may offer contraceptive opportunities, or more broadly, therapeutic strategies for global cilia defects. Here we have identified Rab-like 2 (RABL2) as an essential requirement for sperm tail assembly and function. RABL2 is a member of a poorly characterized clade of the RAS GTPase superfamily. RABL2 is highly enriched within developing male germ cells, where it localizes to the mid-piece of the sperm tail. Lesser amounts of Rabl2 mRNA were observed in other tissues containing motile cilia. Using a co-immunoprecipitation approach and RABL2 affinity columns followed by immunochemistry, we demonstrated that within developing haploid germ cells RABL2 interacts with intra-flagella transport (IFT) proteins and delivers a specific set of effector (cargo) proteins, including key members of the glycolytic pathway, to the sperm tail. RABL2 binding to effector proteins is regulated by GTP. Perturbed RABL2 function, as exemplified by the Mot mouse line that contains a mutation in a critical protein–protein interaction domain, results in male sterility characterized by reduced sperm output, and sperm with aberrant motility and short tails. Our data demonstrate a novel function for the RABL protein family, an essential role for RABL2 in male fertility and a previously uncharacterised mechanism for protein delivery to the flagellum.
      Author Summary: A greater understanding of the mechanism of male fertility is essential in order to address the medical needs of the 1 in 20 men of reproductive age who are infertile. Conversely, there remains a critical need for additional contraceptive options, including those that target male gametes. Towards the aim of filling these knowledge gaps, we have used random mutagenesis to produce the Mot mouse line and to identify RABL2 as an essential regulator of male fertility. Mice carrying a mutant Rabl2 gene are sterile as a consequence of severely compromised sperm motility. Using biochemical approaches we have revealed that RABL2 binds to components of the intraflagellar transport machinery and have identified a number of RABL2 binding (effector) proteins. The presence of the Mot mutation in RABL2 leads to a significantly compromised ability to deliver binding proteins into the sperm tail. RABL2 is predominantly produced in male germ cells; however, lower levels are notably produced in organs that contain motile cilia (hair like structures involved in fluid/cell movement), thus raising the possibility that RABL2 may be involved in a broader set of human diseases collectively known as primary cilia dyskinesia. 
