
        Spermatogenesis is a complex process reliant upon interactions between germ cells (GC) and supporting somatic cells. Testicular Sertoli cells (SC) support GCs during maturation through physical attachment, the provision of nutrients, and protection from immunological attack. This role is facilitated by an active cytoskeleton of parallel microtubule arrays that permit transport of nutrients to GCs, as well as translocation of spermatids through the seminiferous epithelium during maturation. It is well established that chemical perturbation of SC microtubule remodelling leads to premature GC exfoliation demonstrating that microtubule remodelling is an essential component of male fertility, yet the genes responsible for this process remain unknown. Using a random ENU mutagenesis approach, we have identified a novel mouse line displaying male-specific infertility, due to a point mutation in the highly conserved ATPase domain of the novel KATANIN p60-related microtubule severing protein Katanin p60 subunit A-like1 (KATNAL1). We demonstrate that Katnal1 is expressed in testicular Sertoli cells (SC) from 15.5 days post-coitum (dpc) and that, consistent with chemical disruption models, loss of function of KATNAL1 leads to male-specific infertility through disruption of SC microtubule dynamics and premature exfoliation of spermatids from the seminiferous epithelium. The identification of KATNAL1 as an essential regulator of male fertility provides a significant novel entry point into advancing our understanding of how SC microtubule dynamics promotes male fertility. Such information will have resonance both for future treatment of male fertility and the development of non-hormonal male contraceptives.
      Author Summary: To identify new genes involved in male fertility, we have used a chemical treatment to induce random mutations within the DNA of mice and then screened for mice exhibiting male infertility. We then used genetic mapping techniques to identify which chromosome the responsible gene was situated within and DNA sequencing to identify the mutation, which was found in Katnal1. We tested the mutated copy of the gene in cells and determined it to be non-functional. We then used antibody detection to determine that, within the testis, KATNAL1 protein is expressed in the sperm-cell supporting Sertoli cells in both mice and humans. Examination of testicular tissue revealed that KATNAL1 functions to control Sertoli cell microtubule dynamics and retention of sperm during their maturation within the tubules of the testis; absence of KATNAL1 results in premature release of immature sperm and male infertility. The identification and characterisation of this gene, the first microtubule severing protein shown to function in Sertoli cells, will further our understanding of how male fertility is promoted, while also providing important information relevant to the development of male contraceptives. 
