In 2005, the Malaysian government began the methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) program as a national program, with 10,000 opioid-dependent individuals voluntarily enrolled [1]. Local data have shown that the MMT program has reduced crime rates and high-risk behavior [2] and improved the quality of life [3], social functioning, and employment status [4] of heroin dependents. Although the Malaysian government has strongly supported harm reduction policies, increasing the number of MMT programs remains an immense challenge. This may be due to the methadone’s side effects, which may cause some patients to leave the MMT program. One of the most common side effects of methadone is sexual dysfunction [5].Numerous studies have been conducted on MMT, and many have found that sexual dysfunction, including hypoactive sexual desire disorder, erectile dysfunction, and orgasmic dysfunction, is common in heroin users and individuals being treated for heroin addiction [5–16]. In a recent meta-analysis, the meta-analytical pooled prevalence for sexual dysfunction among methadone users was 52% (95% confidence interval, 0.39–0.65). Hypoactive sexual desire disorder and low libido were the most prevalent sexual dysfunctions, accounting for 51% of cases [17]. Although reduction of the dose or discontinuation of methadone would be expected to improve sexual function, conflicting results have been obtained in previous studies [5,7]. Other possible confounders, such as depression, older age, psychological disorders, medical conditions such as obesity and viral hepatitis, and unhealthy lifestyle [9,18–20], can have negative effects on sexual function.Methadone is a slow- and long-acting opiate agonist that stimulates μ-opioid receptors in various areas of the brain. Several hypotheses have been suggested to explain the correlation between methadone use and sexual dysfunction. One well-known hypothesis is that methadone exerts neuroendocrinological effects on the tubero-infundibular and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axes. The chronic stimulation of the μ-opioid receptors by methadone alters the function of the tubero-infundibular axis and the dopaminergic control of prolactin, with a consequential impact on sexual functioning [21]. A high level of circulating prolactin causes the inhibition of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which lowers the levels of sex hormones, especially testosterone. Men with low testosterone levels may exhibit a decrease in sexual interest [22]. Furthermore, studies have also shown that methadone inhibits copulatory behavior when administered acutely or chronically in animals, and it decreases socio-sexual interaction without interfering with locomotion [23,24].Buprenorphine, an alternative to methadone, has recently been increasingly recognized as an effective anti-opioid addiction agent. It is a mixed agonist-antagonist opioid, with a low intrinsic activity and a high affinity for the µ-opioid receptor and no intrinsic activity but a high affinity for the κ-opioid receptor. Histological studies in buprenorphine-administered rats showed no significant changes in the basement membrane, seminiferous tubules, Sertoli cells, interstitial tissue, or sperm compared to a group that received methadone [25]. In humans, however, the results have been contradictory. Some studies have found that, unlike MMT, buprenorphine maintenance treatment (BMT) was not associated with sexual dysfunction. In contrast, other studies have found that erectile dysfunction was equally frequent in the two groups [5,6,16,26]. All these trials, however, had small samples sizes; therefore, the role of buprenorphine in sexual dysfunction in heroin-dependent patients is yet to be determined [5,6].A recent qualitative study [27] has found that some MMT subjects who experienced sexual dysfunction chose to withdraw from interactions with their partners, which led to conflicts. Such conflicts negatively impacted the rehabilitation. Furthermore, inappropriate reactions to the sexual problems included premature treatment discontinuation under pressure from partners, methadone dose reduction, and use of other illicit drugs to enhance sexual performance [27]. Although sexual dysfunction is not life-threatening, it may often result in withdrawal from sexual intimacy, thereby reducing quality of life [7].Therefore, we conducted this study to investigate sexual dysfunction in opiate-dependent men on MMT and BMT. We also investigated the correlation and association between sexual dysfunction and quality of life in this group of patients.
