People vary in their enjoyment of sexual activity and relationships – a source of significant mental wellbeing or problems. Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) describes a cluster of sexual symptoms including desire, arousal, orgasm and pain. It appears relatively common in the general community and population-level samples and is associated with a severe decrease in quality of life in women [1]–[3]. The etiology of FSD is largely unknown although several biological and psychological correlates have been reported [3]–[5]. Nevertheless, no clear disease mechanisms have emerged and this lack of knowledge has hampered progress in both, psychiatric nosology and treatment strategies for this growing burden on women’s psychiatric health. Both, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition and International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision [6] have arranged FSD into categories based largely on clinical similarities, while in 1998 a consensus based definition and classification system was designed by a panel of experts during the International Consensus Development [7].Biological research into FSD is woefully inadequate. Recent twin studies suggest FSD is familial, with genetic factors accounting for up to 51% of the phenotypic variance [8]–[10]. Twin studies also show evidence of genetic and environmental contributions to psychological factors previously linked to FSD (such as depression, anxiety, personality traits) [11]–[13]. Thus, it is possible that some of the covariation between FSD and these psychological correlates is explained by shared genetic and non-genetic factors. However, there have been no large-scale studies to identify single genes or gene variants robustly associated with FSD-phenotypes (and no genome-wide association study - GWAS - has ever been performed). To date, only a handful of candidate gene studies of sexual desire and function exist. One candidate gene study has linked serotonin polymorphisms (5HT2A) to reduced sexual desire as a side-effect of SSRI-medication in 89 adult men and women [14]. A further study reported an association between the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) with self-reports of sexual desire and arousal in 52 men and 92 women [15]. Interleukin-1beta gene (IL-1B) has been correlated with variation in vulvar vestibulitis syndrome scores, a broader phenotype for sexual pain symptoms [16]. All these studies have methodological shortcomings that limit their interpretation, primarily the candidate gene design, small samples in mostly clinical populations (thus lacking power to detect phenotype – DNA variant associations), and the use of non-standardized instruments that lack coverage of the phenotypic heterogeneity in sexual function. Moreover, none of these studies examine women and FSD directly, making them unsuitable for clarifying the etiological mechanisms under FSD at the population-level.We present here the results of the first GWAS of FSD in a female population-sample published to date. By scanning a dense set of genetic variants throughout the whole genome, we can test replication of previously located genes from candidate gene investigations and also identify novel genes that may lead to the discovery of unknown biological pathways involved in the development of FSD.
