Countless myths surround sexual satisfaction. Mass media suggest that multiple or simultaneous orgasms, large penis size, or hour-long tantric sex are needed for women or men to feel sexually satisfied. While research has already falsified some of these myths (e.g., penis size) [1], and has pointed out a number of variables that are correlated to sexual satisfaction [2–4], the question of which factors actually matter when it comes to a satisfying sexual life still remains unanswered. Sexual satisfaction has been defined as the evaluation of positive and negative dimensions of one’s sexual relationship [5]. These dimensions may include personal experiences (e.g., how often one reaches orgasm during sex), the experiences of the sexual partner (e.g., how consistently a partner has an erection during sex), or relationship-related aspects of sexuality (e.g., how often a couple has sex or how openly sexual matters are discussed). An appropriate way to quantify which aspects of a sexual relationship contribute most to a satisfying sexual life is to consider a wide range of potential predictors, to use dyadic couples’ data, and to choose a data analysis technique that allows for estimation of the predictive value of actor-, partner-, and relationship-related factors [2,6,7].
Dyadic approach to sexual satisfaction
Most studies that have investigated sexual satisfaction have done so with samples of individuals, not couples. However, in order to investigate sexual satisfaction, it is crucial to take into account the interpersonal context in which a substantial part of sexual activity happens [5]. Couples’ data enables researchers to use a dyadic data analysis approach that estimates actor effects (i.e., an actor’s own scores on predictor variables) and partner effects (i.e., a partner’s scores on predictor variables) on outcome variables such as sexual satisfaction [8]. Of the 197 studies on sexual satisfaction that were reviewed by Sanchez-Fuentes and colleagues [4], only 24 studies included non-clinical couples’ data and none of them used a sample selected to be representative for the general population. Most of the reviewed couples-studies focused on certain target-populations, for example pregnant women [9] or cancer survivors [10] and their partners, and investigated the impact of their specific life situation on sexual satisfaction. Others used relatively small, convenience samples [11,12]. Even though these studies may provide valuable insight into the relation between sexual satisfaction and, for example, coping with a serious medical condition, the generalizability of their findings is limited.
An additional short-coming of previous research on sexual satisfaction is that most predictors, such as sexual communication [11] or sexual function [13] have been examined in relative isolation, without taking other possible predictors into consideration [6].
To our knowledge, this is the first study to overcome limitations of previous studies that used convenience samples, restricted their sample to certain age groups or target populations or investigated certain predictor variables in isolation [6]. To investigate the relative significance of different of sexuality-related factors of sexual satisfaction, our study includes wide-ranging predictors, namely sexual function and distress, frequency of sexual activities alone or with a partner as well as sexual desire discrepancy, sexual communication, and sociosexual attitudes. These factors were selected to represent both quantitative and qualitative aspects of a sexual relationship, and to estimate the relevance of personal sexual attitudes and solitary sexual behaviors in comparison to factors that require a sexual partner. In addition to these sexuality related factors, we included life satisfaction to control for a more general well-being, and other predictors (i.e., passage of time, household income) were included to control for and to investigate their relevance for sexual satisfaction on an exploratory basis.

Sexual function and sexual distress
Sexual function is positively correlated to sexual satisfaction in women and men [13–15]. Sexual desire, arousal, and orgasm consistency are associated with greater satisfaction [16]. Conversely, lack of vaginal lubrication, erectile dysfunction, early ejaculation, inability to reach orgasm, and pain during intercourse are associated with lower sexual satisfaction [13,17]. Moreover, preliminary evidence suggests that certain aspects of a partner’s sexual function (e.g., low sexual desire) may be also relevant for an actor’s sexual satisfaction [2]. Two of the most commonly used instruments for sexual function—the Female Sexual Function Index [18] and the International Index of Erectile Function [19]—have been criticized for not assessing personal distress related to sexual problems [20]. Assessing distress is crucial in identifying clinically relevant sexual dysfunctions [21] and in determining how sexual function (or the lack thereof) is experienced and evaluated by the individual.

Sexual frequency and sexual communication
Greater frequency of sexual activity is related to greater sexual satisfaction in women and men [22]. The difference between the desired and the actual sexual frequency has been called sexual desire discrepancy [23]. Greater desire discrepancy is associated with lower relationship satisfaction [23], a variable that is strongly correlated to sexual satisfaction [24]. In another study, in which desire discrepancy was defined as the difference in desire between sexual partners, low discrepancy was positively related to both relationship and sexual satisfaction [25]. In dating partnerships, men tend to initiate sex almost twice as often as women [26]. Sexual satisfaction is associated with more frequent sexual initiation in both genders and less frequent negative response to a partner's initiation in women [26]. How the balance of sexual initiative between partners influences sexual satisfaction has not been established. However, Lau et al. [27] reported that the belief that the husband should always initiate sexual interactions was associated with lower sexual satisfaction in both spouses. Being able to openly express sexual wishes or to communicate sexual concerns with a partner is associated with greater sexual satisfaction [28]. In a study of 220 married couples, indirectness of communication about sexual intimacy was associated with lower sexual satisfaction [7].

Sociosexual orientation and solitary sexual behavior
Sociosexual orientation has been described as the willingness to engage in sex outside of exclusive, committed relationships [29]. In a student sample, sociosexuality was not significantly correlated to sexual satisfaction [30]. It is, however, not yet established how sociosexual orientation influences sexual satisfaction within committed partnerships. It is not unlikely that over the course of long-term relationships, a positive attitude towards casual sex may contribute to more extramarital involvement and/or lower sexual satisfaction within the partnership. The effects of solitary sexual behavior on sexual satisfaction within partnerships may be diverse. Women that had never reached orgasm through self-stimulation reported lower sexual satisfaction compared to women who had had this experience [31]. More frequent masturbation was, however, related to lower sexual satisfaction in women and men [32].

Other potential predictors
Passage of time (i.e., age or relationship duration) is negatively correlated to sexual frequency [33] and older participants tend to have lower levels of sexual function [34]. The relationship between passage of time and sexual satisfaction may be less pronounced. However, Liu [35] reported a small and negative effect of relationship duration on the perceived quality of marital sex. The effect of the duration of a relationship on sexual satisfaction may also be gender-specific. Compared to men, women's sexual satisfaction may be more strongly related to relationship duration [36]. To investigate passage of time in unison with other sexuality-related predictors may be useful to clarify its relative contribution to a satisfying sexual life.
Satisfaction with life has been defined "as a global assessment of a person's quality of life" [37, p. 478]. Young, married individuals reported greater levels of life satisfaction compared to their unmarried counterparts [38]. Life satisfaction is related to other aspects of general well-being [39], and may also be associated to sexual satisfaction. Using factor-analysis, Fugl-Meyer et al. [40] found that sexual satisfaction was closely related to satisfaction in other areas of life, namely satisfaction with the ability to care for themselves, as well as satisfaction with partnership and family life. Taken together, these facets of satisfaction explained more than 50% of general life satisfaction.
Few studies have been conducted to assess the influence of socioeconomic factors on sexual satisfaction [6]. In one study by Rainer and Smith [41], household income was unrelated to sexual satisfaction. In another study, income was negatively related to sexual satisfaction in men [42]. The authors offer two possible explanations for these findings: Men with high income might have more access to extramarital affairs or might have extraordinarily high expectations for their sexual fulfillment. Both factors may lower satisfaction within their current partnerships. However, higher socioeconomic status is also associated with better mental and physical health [43,44], which are correlated with higher sexual function [45], a variable closely related to sexual satisfaction. To date, there is no consensus on how household income as well as an individual’s personal contribution to this income may relate to sexual satisfaction.
The aim of the present study was to investigate which aspects of sexual relationships contribute most to sexual satisfaction. Based on the findings summarized above, we hypothesized the following actor effects: Sexual function and sexual frequency would be positive predictors of sexual satisfaction; whereas sexual distress, desire discrepancy, sociosexual orientation and masturbation would be negatively predictive of sexual satisfaction. We further hypothesized that sexual communication would have a positive impact on actors’ sexual satisfaction, and that, taken together with the other predictors, passage of time (i.e., relationship duration and age) would not be predictive of actors’ sexual satisfaction. Because previous evidence was limited, partner effects were only hypothesized for sexual function―we expected that high sexual functioning in partners would be associated with greater actor sexual satisfaction. Additional predictors (e.g., sexual initiative, life satisfaction, income, and proportion of own income) were included on an exploratory basis.

