In 2013, the worldwide maternal mortality ratio (MMR) was 209 per 100,000 live births [1]. This is only a small part of the whole problem regarding the women´s health care during pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum period. For each woman dying, up to thirty others may experience severe complications that threaten their lives and/or cause any kind of temporary or permanent adverse consequences [2]. Women who almost died but survived after a severe obstetric complication are classified as “maternal near miss” according to the WHO (World Health Organization). This diagnosis is established through clinical, laboratory and/or management criteria [3].Mapping severe maternal morbidity among cases of obstetric complications provides further information on prevalence and outcome of these conditions. Currently, SMM (severe maternal morbidity) and more specifically MNM (maternal near miss) are considered to be better indicators for maternal health condition than maternal mortality ratio alone [3, 4]. Nevertheless, there are not many studies addressing possible negative impacts of such conditions on women’s future wellbeing and health [5, 6].In fact, little is known about long-term consequences on women’s physical or emotional health after an obstetric complication. Most studies on the subject followed these women no longer than forty-two days after childbirth. Appropriate understanding of the worsening of general health state following obstetric complications could improve quality of health care for this population.Sexual function could theoretically be used to measure the impact of episodes of severe maternal morbidity on women´s life. However, there is limited data about the occurrence of sexual dysfunction comparing women with or without maternal morbidity. The Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) is a validated instrument that addresses the subjectivity of sexual response by splitting sexual components (phases) into six domains [7]. Nevertheless, women who experienced severe maternal morbidity have not yet been properly studied regarding their sexual function. Between 60% and 90% of postpartum women are expected to resume sexual activity up to three months after an uncomplicated pregnancy [8]. Even so, there are not many studies addressing time to resumption of sexual intercourse after obstetric complications. Overall, it is not yet clear if severe maternal morbidity and near miss change female sexual response.Therefore, the objective of this study was to assess Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) scores and delay to resume sexual activity in association with severe maternal morbidity, in a cohort of women in Brazil.
