A sexual dysfunction arises when there is a disturbance in a person’s ability to respond sexually or to experience sexual pleasure, and it is associated with significant personal distress [1]. One of the most common sexual complaints in women is a lack of interest in sex, which is defined in the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) as Sexual Interest/Arousal Disorder (SIAD). The diagnosis of this disorder requires at least three of the following: (a) a lack of interest in sex, (b) few/no sexual thoughts, (c) lack of receptivity to a partner’s sexual invitations and no initiation of sexual behavior, (d) a lack of pleasure during sexual activity, (e) lack of responsive desires to erotic triggers, and (f) reduced physical signs of sexual arousal [1].Mindfulness has arisen as a promising approach to improving women’s low sexual desire [2–6]. By increasing women’s ability to attend to sexual stimuli, mindfulness may improve sexual function by directly increasing their sexual response [7]. Sexual response is generally thought of as an emotion with subjective or experiential, physiological, and behavioral components [8].
Emotions and response coherence
Emotions have been defined as:

a complex set of interactions […] which can (a) give rise to affective experiences such as feelings of arousal, pleasure/displeasure; (b) generate cognitive processes […]; (c) activate widespread physiological adjustments to the arousing conditions; and (d) lead to behavior that is often, but not always, expressive, goal-directed, and adaptive [9].

According to influential theories, a defining feature of emotions is response coherence, such that different aspects of the emotion are correlated with one another [10–12]. The extent to which these response levels agree, differs between different emotions [13,14]. Research on anxiety and fear, for example, has revealed that physiological, experiential, and behavioral responses towards feared stimuli often occur at different time points and are at least partially independent [15–18].
Though emotion theory suggests that bodily sensations and other visceral responses are key to determining subjective emotional experience [19], there is substantial evidence in sexual psychophysiological research for a lack of response coherence (or concordance) between subjective and physiological responses [20]. Increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, and increased skin conductance levels have been described as physiological responses to visual erotic stimuli in some [21,22], but not in all studies [23]. The component of physiological arousal that is most specific to sexual arousal is the genital arousal response that includes increased blood flow to the genitals, resulting in a swelling of the clitoris, vagina, and vulva as well as vaginal lubrication in women [24,25].
In a meta-analysis of 132 studies that examined sexual arousal concordance (i.e., association between psychophysiological sexual arousal and self-reported sexual response), Chivers et al. [20] found concordance estimates in women to be consistently lower than concordance in men (r = .26 vs r = .62, respectively). To further understand this sex difference, they examined a large number of variables proposed to be related to concordance, such as: age, use of oral contraceptives, statistical measures, and type of sexual stimuli used. A statistically significant gender difference in sexual concordance was found regardless of most methodological factors. Understanding the nature of this sex difference in concordance has been of significant interest to sex researchers over the past decade.
In addition to this sex difference, Chivers et al. [25] found that women with sexual dysfunction had an average concordance score of r = .04, ranging from r = -.10 to r = .17, which was significantly lower than samples of sexually healthy women. The clinical significance of this low level of sexual concordance is unknown. Moreover, the association between sexual arousal concordance and other measures of response coherence has never been studied in a sample of women with sexual dysfunction, and is the aim of the present study.

Interoceptive awareness and sexual concordance
Interoception refers to an individual's ability to recognize internal physiological states, such as heart rate or respiration rate. Some have speculated that the sex difference in sexual concordance may be due to a sex difference in overall interoceptive ability, such that the same processes that contribute towards awareness of physiological signs in the body may also contribute to awareness of signs of sexual arousal [26,27]. Men are generally more accurate than women at detecting their own heart rate [28], blood pressure [29], and stomach contractions [30]. This sex difference has been hypothesized to be due to a sex difference in emotional processing: in laboratory settings, men’s interoceptive abilities seems to be dependent on internal cues, whereas women’s interoceptive abilities are more reliant on external cues [20,31].
A few studies sought to explore the relationship between interoceptive awareness and sexual arousal concordance. In one study, healthy men and women viewed sexual and neutral film clips, during which their genital response, heart rate, and respiration rate were measured, using a vaginal or penile plethysmograph, electrocardiogram (ECG), and a thermistor [27]. After each clip, participants answered questions regarding their feelings of genital sexual arousal, their overall sexual arousal, their emotional experience, as well as their perceived heart rate and respiration rate. Although men showed higher concordance for genital response and heart rate than women, there was no association between sexual concordance and heart rate or respiration rate concordance. Since participants rated their heart rate and respiration rate awareness after the films, Suschinsky and Lalumière hypothesized that their ratings may have been influenced by memory or distraction from film clips [27]. Therefore, in a follow-up study, Suschinsky and Lalumière [32] utilized the Heartbeat Perception Task [33] to measure physiological awareness, which involved women counting their heartbeats before and after watching an erotic film clip, in 16 anxious and 15 non-anxious women. Again, sexual concordance was not significantly related to heartbeat perception accuracy or to respiration rate awareness in the combined group. Moreover, heart rate awareness and respiration rate awareness were also not significantly correlated. Suschinsky and Lalumière concluded that low levels of concordance may reflect the norm for women, but urged other researchers to explore this further in women with sexual dysfunction, given that anecdotal evidence suggests that a low awareness of physical sensations may be linked to low sexual desire in women [27].
To our knowledge, only one study has investigated the relationship between interoception and sexual concordance in women using a self-report questionnaire. In a sample of 26 women, the noticing subscale of the Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness scale (MAIA) [34] was related to greater sexual concordance. In other words, women who reported a greater awareness of uncomfortable, comfortable, and neutral body sensations showed a greater agreement of genital and subjective sexual arousal. Two limitations reduce the generalizability of their findings: The sample consisted of young, sexually healthy, college students. Therefore, findings may not apply to older women or women with sexual concerns. In addition, the MAIA was administered after a laboratory session that included a sexual arousal measurement including the instruction to focus attention on genital sensations. This procedure may have lead to higher scores on the MAIA and might have directly contributed to the association between laboratory-based MAIA scores and laboratory-based arousal concordance.
In the current study, subjective and genital arousal were assessed continuously during stimulus presentation [35]. Women’s genital sexual response was measured with a vaginal photoplethysmograph, a tampon-shaped device that measures vaginal blood flow. Vaginal pulse amplitude (VPA) is a valid and reliable measure for female genital arousal [8,36,37], although there is an ongoing scientific debate about its relationship to other aspects of women’s sexual response such as lubrication or clitoral blood volume [38–40]. Nevertheless, the usefulness of the VPA measure has been shown in a large body of research [20,41].
Taken together, the goal of this study was to examine the relationship between interoceptive awareness (measured both objectively and with a self-report measure) and sexual concordance in women with SIAD. We aimed to replicate the design from one previous study [32], but with two modifications: (a) we included a validated self-report measure of interoceptive awareness in addition to measuring heartbeat perception accuracy objectively; and (b) we applied the design to a sample of women with a diagnosed sexual dysfunction. Though we predicted a positive but small association between genital and subjective sexual arousal, we did not have a priori predictions about the association between sexual concordance and interoception, measured either objectively or subjectively, given conflicting findings in the literature to date. Given that our sample was relatively homogeneous in that they all met criteria for SIAD, we did not predict many individual differences in the associations between concordance and interoceptive awareness. A better understanding of the associations between awareness of interoceptive sensations and sexual response may shed light on the mechanisms by which psychosocial interventions, especially those aiming to increase awareness of the body, lead to improvements in women’s sexual functioning.

